Introduce Server-side editor API docs (#18641)
ckeditor/ckeditor5: docs/features/server-side-editor-api.md

---
category: cloud-services
order: 300
meta-title: Server-side Editor API | CKEditor 5 Documentation
modified_at: 2025-06-05
---

> # Server-side editor API

Reviewer: We may, it will go together well with the rest.

---
category: cloud-services
order: 30
meta-title: Cloud Services Server-side Editor API | CKEditor 5 Documentation
meta-description: Learn how to use server-side API to manage content and collaboration data easily without running the editor.
modified_at: 2025-06-05
badges: [ premium ]
---

# Server-side editor API

Server-side Editor API enables deep and complex integration of your application with all document data, enabling you to manipulate content and manage collaborative data such as suggestions, comments, and revision history, and much more, directly from your server-side code.

The remote script REST API endpoint allows you to execute any JavaScript code that uses the CKEditor&nbsp;5 API, that could be executed by a browser, but without a need to open the editor by a human user. Instead, the script is executed on the Cloud Services server.

## Why use server-side editor API?

While CKEditor&nbsp;5 provides a rich client-side editing experience, there are many scenarios where server-side content processing is essential:

> * **Automation**: Run content processing tasks as part of your server workflows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Automation**: Run content processing tasks as part of your back-end workflows.
```

// Insert the content at the specified position.
editor.model.insertContent( model, insertPosition );
```

### Using editor model API

If you cannot find a command that would perform a specific action on the document, you can use the editor API to apply precise changes. This approach offers the greatest flexibility and should cover any needs you may have. It requires, however, a better understanding of CKEditor internals.

For example, consider a scenario where you need to update all links in your document from `/docs/` to `/documents/`. This is a common task when moving content between environments or updating your site structure.

```js
// Get the root element and create a range that covers all content.
const root = editor.model.document.getRoot();
const range = editor.model.createRangeIn( root );
const items = Array.from( range.getItems() );

editor.model.change( writer => {
	for ( const item of items ) {
		let href = item.getAttribute( 'linkHref' );

		if ( item.is( 'textProxy' ) && href ) {
			// Update the link URL.
			href = href.replace( '/docs/', '/documents/' );
			writer.setAttribute( 'linkHref', href, item );
		}
	}
} );
```

> This approach is particularly useful when you need to update many links at once or fix broken links across your content.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This approach is particularly when you have to modify the document data in a very specific way, and the generic, high-level API cannot cover it.
```

To learn more about working with the editor engine, see the {@link framework/architecture/editing-engine Editing engine} guide.

## Working with track changes

You can leverage the {@link features/track-changes track changes} feature API to manage existing content suggestions, retrieve final document data with all suggestions accepted, or implement automated or AI-powered content reviews.

### Using commands

Track changes is integrated with most editor commands. If you wish to change the document using commands and track these changes, all you need to do is turn on track changes mode.

Let's start with a basic text replacement:

```js
// Enable track changes to mark our edits as suggestions.
editor.execute( 'trackChanges' );

// Make a simple text replacement.
editor.execute( 'replaceAll', 'CKSource', 'Cksource' );
```

The `trackChanges` command ensures that all changes made by other commands are marked as suggestions.

### Content changes

> Now, let's see how to suggest content removal:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, let's see how to suggest deleting a specified part of the document:
```

// Add the content as a suggestion at the beginning of the document.
const firstElement = editor.model.document.getRoot().getChild( 0 );
const insertPosition = editor.model.createPositionAt( firstElement, 0 );

editor.model.insertContent( modelFragment, insertPosition );
```

The `insertContent()` method can be used in the following scenarios:

* Automated suggestions based on external data.
* Creating templates that need review before finalization.
* Integrating with content management systems to propose changes.
* Building custom workflows for content creation and review.

### Working with suggestions

You can use the {@link module:track-changes/trackchangesdata~TrackChangesData track changes data plugin} to get the document data with all suggestions either accepted or rejected:

```js
// Get the track changes data plugin.
const trackChangesData = editor.plugins.get( 'TrackChangesData' );

// Get the document data with all suggestions rejected.
// You can also use `trackChangesData.getDataWithAcceptedSuggestions()` to get data with all suggestions accepted.
const data = trackChangesData.getDataWithDiscardedSuggestions();

return data;
```

> This is particularly useful when processing the "original" or the "final" document data. This happens when you need to check if pending suggestions were discarded or accepted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is particularly useful when you need to show or process the "original" or the "final" document data.
```

For more granular control, you can also manage individual suggestions:

```js
// Get the track changes editing plugin.
const trackChangesEditing = editor.plugins.get( 'TrackChangesEditing' );

// Get a specific suggestion by its ID.
const suggestion = trackChangesEditing.getSuggestion( 'suggestion-id' );

// Accept the suggestion.
suggestion.accept();
// Or discard it.
// suggestion.discard();
```

It allows to display and manage suggestions outside of the editor, for example in a separate application view where users can see all comments and suggestions and resolve them without going into the editor.

### Attribute modifications

If you wish to create attributes suggestions using the editor model API, you need to specifically tell the track changes features to record these changes. Let's look at how to correctly make a suggestion to update links URLs:

```js
// Get the track changes editing plugin for direct access to suggestion recording.

> const tcEditing = editor.plugins.get( 'TrackChangesEditing' );

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
const trackChangesEditing = editor.plugins.get( 'TrackChangesEditing' );
```

// Get the root element and create a range that covers all content.
const root = editor.model.document.getRoot();
const range = editor.model.createRangeIn( root );
const items = Array.from( range.getItems() );

// Process each item in the document.
for ( const item of items ) {
	editor.model.change( writer => {
		// Use _recordAttributeChanges to ensure the change is properly recorded as a suggestion.

> 		tcEditing._recordAttributeChanges( () => {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
		trackChangesEditing._recordAttributeChanges( () => {
```

			let href = item.getAttribute( 'linkHref' );

			// Only process text proxies (parts of text nodes) that have a `linkHref` attribute.
			if ( item.is( 'textProxy' ) && href ) {
				// Update the link URL, for example changing '/docs/' to '/documents/'.
				href = href.replace( '/docs/', '/documents/' );

				// Set the new attribute value, which will be recorded as a suggestion.
				writer.setAttribute( 'linkHref', href, item );
			}
		} );
	} );
}
```

## Resolving comments

The {@link features/comments comments} feature allows your users to have discussions on certain parts of your documents. You can use the comments feature API to implement interactions with comments with no need to open the editor itself.

For example, here's how to resolve all comment threads in a given document:

```js
// Get all comment threads from the document.
const threads = editor.plugins.get( 'CommentsRepository' ).getCommentThreads();

// Resolve all open comment threads.
for ( const thread of threads ) {
	if ( !thread.isResolved ) {
		thread.resolve();
	}
}
```

> This code is particularly useful when you need to clean up a document before finalizing it. You might use it to automatically resolve old discussions, prepare documents for publication, or maintain a clean comment history in your content management system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This code is particularly useful when you need to clean up a document. You might use it to automatically resolve old discussions, prepare documents for publication, or maintain a clean comment history in your content management system.
```

## Working with revision history

Use the {@link features/revision-history revision history} feature API to build more functional integration between your application and the document revisions data.

### Saving revisions

You can use Revision history API to save a new revision directly from your application backend:

```js
// Save the current state as a new revision.
editor.plugins.get( 'RevisionTracker' ).saveRevision( { name: 'New revision' } );
```

This can be used on an unchanged document just to create a document snapshot, or after you performed some changes to save them as a new revision.

Revision history API can help you build an automated mechanism that will automatically create revisions in some time intervals, or based on other factors. It can be particularly useful when you need to create checkpoints for your documents to maintain an audit trail of content modifications.

### Working with revision data

> For more advanced scenarios, you might need to work with different revisions of your document:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In more complex scenarios, you might have a need to work with content coming from various revisions of your document:
```

---
category: cloud-services
order: 30
meta-title: Cloud Services Server-side Editor API | CKEditor 5 Documentation
meta-description: Learn how to use server-side API to manage content and collaboration data easily without running the editor.
modified_at: 2025-06-05
badges: [ premium ]
---

# Server-side editor API

Server-side Editor API enables deep and complex integration of your application with all document data, enabling you to manipulate content and manage collaborative data such as suggestions, comments, and revision history, and much more, directly from your server-side code.

> The remote script REST API endpoint allows you to execute any JavaScript code that uses the CKEditor&nbsp;5 API, that could be executed by a browser, but without a need to open the editor by a human user. Instead, the script is executed on the Cloud Services server.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The remote REST API endpoint allows you to execute any JavaScript code that uses the CKEditor&nbsp;5 API, that could be executed by a browser, but without a need to open the editor by a human user. Instead, the script is executed on the Cloud Services server.
```

Reviewer 2: The idea here was that this is "remote script" as is "remotely executed script" (executed on the server). This will probably be changed to "The server-side editor REST API endpoint ..." anyway.

* **Performance**: Handle large-scale content operations without impacting the user's browser.
* **Consistency**: Ensure uniform content changes across multiple documents.
* **Integration**: Connect with other server-side systems and databases directly.

## Common use cases

* **Deep integration**: Build custom features that can manage document content and related document data straight from your application UI, without a need to open the editor.
* **Content migration**: Restructure and update references across multiple documents, perfect for website redesigns or content reorganization.
* **Shared content blocks**: Automatically update reusable content (like headers, footers, or common sections) across all documents that use it.
* **Automated review systems**: Build systems that automatically review and suggest content changes, like grammar checks or style improvements.
* **AI-powered editing**: Make automated suggestions while users are actively editing, helping improve content quality.
* **Automated publishing**: Prepare and process content for publication, including formatting, metadata updates, and resolving comments.

> ## Getting started with server-side editor API

Reviewer 2: Yes, `editor` is a globally available variable, I think it could be mentioned in the very first snippet.

But one more missing piece of data may be that you actually need to upload the bundle. Of course that will be in the CS guide, but would be good to have it here as well?

Thanks for comments, we are biased with having this knowledge.

> ## Getting started with server-side editor API

Reviewer: You do realize this is not exactly a guide for total noobs? We need to assume the user reading this has already gone through some of our docs, and also, I think we should link some to not duplicate all the knowledge. The question is the extent of this.

> ## Getting started with server-side editor API

Reviewer 4: I think even mediocre and advanced noobs will have no idea where the magic variable in 5+ snippets comes from and how to get it on the server ;)

> ## Getting started with server-side editor API

Reviewer: Yeah, this one is true :D

> ## Getting started with server-side editor API

Reviewer 4: I only need a sentence or a callout (note) that `editor` is globally available, that's all :D.

This guide explains how to write scripts that can be executed through the Server-side Editor API endpoint. The following sections provide examples of such scripts, each demonstrating a specific use case that can be automated on the server side.

> For information about setting up and using the endpoint itself, see the {TODO: link Cloud Services Server-side Editor API} documentation.

Reviewer 3: Ideally, we should have a short example here, so all the necessary knowledge is in one place. At least from the API usage perspective – so assuming that someone uploaded a bundle and have credentials already. Something that will be sufficient for a person familiar with the Collab REST APIs already. 

Alternatively/Optionally: This could be a screencast showing one of the usecases: E.g. adding a comment via SS Ed API, while it simultaneously shows up in the editor content in a browser.

Reviewer 3: Note: This screencast will be useful for the blog post as well (cc @wojtekidd)

Reviewer: We'll get to it, I believe :)

* **Shared content blocks**: Automatically update reusable content (like headers, footers, or common sections) across all documents that use it.
* **Automated review systems**: Build systems that automatically review and suggest content changes, like grammar checks or style improvements.
* **AI-powered editing**: Make automated suggestions while users are actively editing, helping improve content quality.
* **Automated publishing**: Prepare and process content for publication, including formatting, metadata updates, and resolving comments.

## Getting started with server-side editor API

This guide explains how to write scripts that can be executed through the Server-side Editor API endpoint. The following sections provide examples of such scripts, each demonstrating a specific use case that can be automated on the server side.

For information about setting up and using the endpoint itself, see the {TODO: link Cloud Services Server-side Editor API} documentation.

## Working with content

<info-box info>
	Please note you need to have a bundle uploaded first with proper credentials <!-- link here--> for the service to work properly.
</info-box>

### Getting editor data

> The most basic action you can perform is getting the editor's data. We use {@link module:core/editor/editor~Editor `editor`} for that, as it is a {@link getting-started/setup/editor-lifecycle globally available variable}.

Reviewer 4: It's a fully correct sentence. `editor` is not globally available unless someone makes it. We enable in Cloud as such. We need an explicit mention that in Cloud env `editor` is available globally.

Reviewer 4: As this is relevant to all snippets (not just data). I propose to move this https://github.com/ckeditor/ckeditor5/pull/18641/files#r2152270879

---
category: cloud-services
order: 30
meta-title: Cloud Services Server-side Editor API | CKEditor 5 Documentation

> meta-description: Learn how to use server-side API to manage content and collaboration data easily without running the editor on the client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
meta-description: Learn how to use server-side API to manage content and collaboration data easily without running the editor on the client side.
```

}
```

#### Working with annotations

> Each suggestion in the editor is always connected with an annotation. Sometimes, you may want to gather additional data for suggestions based on their annotations, such as the suggestion label or the content in the document on which the suggestion is made, which are not available in the database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each suggestion in the editor is always connected with an annotation. Sometimes, you may want to gather additional data for suggestions based on their annotations, such as the suggestion label or the content in the document on which the suggestion is made, which are not available through REST API.
```

```

For more information about creating custom plugins, see the {@link framework/architecture/plugins Plugins architecture} guide and the {@link tutorials/creating-simple-plugin-timestamp Creating a basic plugin} tutorial.

## Error handling

> If an error occurs while processing the script on the server side, the API will return an error and include the specific information about the encountered problem in the `data.error` object. Additionally, a `trace_id` is returned, which allows you to look up more detailed information about the specific event on the server. This makes it easier to quickly diagnose and resolve issues based on the provided identifier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If an error occurs while processing the script on the server side, the API will return an error message and include the specific information about the encountered problem in the `data.error` object. Additionally, a `trace_id` is returned, which allows you to look up more detailed information about the specific event on the server. This makes it easier to quickly diagnose and resolve issues based on the provided identifier.
```
